What follows is my submission. I was at a bit of a loss concerning what to send you, as I lack pretty much any artistic skill. Thinking about what I could contribute, my thoughts came to the large pile of my books which I have been sitting next to for the majority of this quarantine. I have decided to excerpt a few passages from the books of this pile which I think stand up well independently, choosing them by how well they fit the themes of this 'zine'. I am resisting the urge to provide substantial commentary to these -- I do not think I have much interesting to say, or I would be submitting my own writing --  but what I will do at the very least is explain what these passages are, why I like them, and why I have selected them.
     The first of these is taken from The U.S.A. Trilogy, by John Dos Passos. This trilogy, published in the early 30's, makes an incredibly ambitious attempt to bring to life early 20th century America by mixing several different narrative techniques. The bulk of the text is traditional prose chapters, each following one of a large cast of characters, though the arcs of these characters, while sometimes intersecting, do not do so in the service of a grand overarching plot, and fade in and out abruptly. As a reader, it has seemed to me that characters are introduced more for desire to cover a particular strata of American society than for desire to tell a story. Interspersed with this ordinary prose storytelling are short stream of consciousness passages about the writer's own past, transcribed contemporaneous news headlines and short fragments of text, and prose-poem biographies of significant people from the era. It is these last sections which I enjoy most and return to often, and I have decided to transcribe one here. I decided to limit my selection to something from the final book of the trilogy, The Big Money, as that is the only one which, fitting with our theme, takes place in the early 1920's. And, since I was asked to submit art, I offer instead what follows:


Art and Isadora

     In San Francisco in eighteen-seventyeight Mrs. Isadora O'Gorman Duncan, a highspirited lady with a taste for the piano, set about divorcing her husband, the prominent Mr. Duncan, whose behavior we are led to believe had been grossly indelicate; the whole thing made her so nervous that she declared to her children that he couldn't keep anything on her stomach but a little champagne and oysters; in the middle of the bitterness and recriminations of the family row,
     into a world of gaslit boardinghouses kept by ruined Southern belles and railroadmagnates and swinging doors and whiskery men nibbling cloves to hide the whiskey on their breaths and brass spittoons and four-wheel cabs and basques and bustles and long ruffled trailing skirts (in which lecturehall and concertroom, under the domination of ladies of culture, were the center of aspiring life)
     she bore a daughter whom she named after herself Isadora.
     The break with Mr. Duncan and the discovery of his duplicity turned Mrs. Duncan into a bigoted feminist and an atheist, a passionate follower of Bob Ingersoll's lectures and writings; for God read Nature; for duty beauty, and only man is vile.
     Mrs. Duncan had a hard struggle to raise her children in the love of beauty and the hatred of corsets and conventions and manmade laws. She gave pianolessons, she did embroidery and knitted scarves and mittens.
     The Duncans were always in debt.
     The rent was always due.
     Isadora's earliest memories were of wheedling grocers and butchers and landlords and selling little things her mother had made from door to door,
     helping handvalises out of back windows when they had to jump their bills at one shabbygenteel boardinghouse after another in the outskirts of Oakland and San Francisco.
     The little Duncans and their mother were a clan; it was the Duncans against a rude and sordid world. The Duncans weren't Catholics any more or Presbyterians or Quakers or Baptists; they were Artists.

     When the children were quite young they managed to stir up an interest among their neighbors by giving theatrical performances in a barn; the older girl Elizabeth gave lessons in society dancing; they were Westerners, the world was a goldrush; they weren't ashamed of being in the public eye. Isadora had green eyes and reddish hair and a beautiful neck and arms. She couldn't afford lessons in conventional dancing, so she made up dances of her own.

    They moved to Chicago. Isadora got a jclippingsob dancing to The Washington Post at the Masonic Temple Roof Garden for fifty a week. She danced at clubs. She went to see Augustin Daly and told him she'd discovered
     the Dance
     and went on in New York as a fairy in cheesecloth in a production of Midsummer Night's Dream with Ada Rehan.
     The family followed her to New York. They rented a big room in Carnegie Hall, put mattresses in the corners, hung drapes on the wall and invented the first Greenwhich Village studio.
     They were never more than one jump ahead of the sheriff, they were always wheedling the tradespeople out of bills, standing the landlady up for the rent, coaxing handouts out of rich philistines.
     Isadora arranged recitals with Ethelbert Nevin
     danced to readings of Omar Khayyám for society women at Newport. When the Hotel Windsor burned they lost all their trunks and the very long bill they owed and sailed for London on a cattleboat
     to escape the materialism of their native America.

     In London at the British Museum
     they discovered the Greeks;
     the Dance was Greek.
     Under the smoky chimneypots of London, in the sootcoated squares, they danced in muslin tunics, they copied poses from Greek vases, went to lectures, artgalleries, concerts, plays, sopped up in a winter fifty years of Victorian culture.
     Back to the Greeks.

     Whenever they were put out of their lodgings for nonpayment of rent, Isadora led them to the best hotel and arranged a suite and sent the waiters scurrying for lobster and champagne and fruits outofseason; nothing was too good for the Artists, Duncans, Greeks;
     and the nineties London liked her gall.
     in Kensington and even in Mayfair she danced at parties in private houses,
     the Britishers, Prince Edward down,
     were carried away by her preraphaelite beauty
     her lusty American innocence
     her California accent.

     After London, Paris during the great exposition of nineteenhundred. She danced with Loïe Fuller. She was still a virgin too shy to return the advances of Rodin the great master, completely baffled by the extraordinary behavior of Loïe Fuller's circle of crackbrained invert beauties. The Duncans were vegetarians, suspicious of vulgarity and men and materialism. Raymond made them all sandals.
     Isadora and her mother and her brother Raymond went about Europe in sandals and fillets and Greek tunics
     staying at the best hotels leading the Greek life of nature in a flutter of unpaid bills.

     Isadora's first solo recital was at a theater in Budapest;
     after that she was the diva, had a loveaffair with a leading actor; in Munich the students took the horses out of her carriage. Everything was flowers and handclapping and champagne suppers. In Berlin she was the rage.
     With  money she made on her German tour she took the Duncans all the Greece. They arrived on a fishingboat from Ithaca. They posed in the Parthenon for photographs and danced in the Theater of Dionysus and trained a crowd of urchins to sing the ancient chorus from the Suppliants and built a temple to live on a hill overlooking the ruin of ancient Athens, but there was no water on the hill and their money ran out before the temple was finished
     so they had to stay at the Hôtel d'Angleterre and run up a bill there. When credit gave out, they took their chorus back to Berlin and put on the Suppliants in ancient Greek. Meeting Isadora in her peplum marching through the Tiergarten at the head of her Greek boys marching in order, all in Greek tunics, the Kaiserin's horse shied,
     and Her Highness was thrown.

     Isadora was the vogue.
     She arrived in St. Petersburg in time to see the night funeral of the marchers shot down in front of the Winter Palace in 1905. It hurt her. She was an American like Walt Whitman; the murdering rulers of the world were not her people; the marchers were her people; artists were not on the side of the machineguns; she was an American in a Greek tunic; she was for the people.
     In St. Petersburg, still under the spell of the eighteenthcentury ballet of the court of the Sunking,
     her dancing was considered dangerous by the authorities.
     In Germany she founded a school with the help of her sister Elizabeth who did the organizing, and she had a baby by Gordon Craig.
     She went to America in triumph as she'd always planned and harried the home philistines with a tour; her followers were all the time getting pinched for wearing Greek tunics; she found no freedom for Art in America.

     Back in Paris it was the top of the world; Art meant Isadora. At the funeral of the Prince de Polignac she met the mythical millionaire (sewingmachine king) who was to be her backer and to finance her school. She went off with him in his yacht (whatever Isadora did was Art)
     to dance in the Temple at Paestum
     only for him,
     but it rained and he musicians all got drenched. So they all got drunk instead.
     Art was the millionaire's life. Art was whatever Isadora did. She was carrying the millionaire's child to the great scandal of the oldlady clubwomen and spinster artlovers when she danced on her second American tour;
     she took to drinking too much and stepping to the footlights and bawling out the boxholders.
     Isadora was at the height of glory and scandal and power and wealth, her school going, her millionaire was about to build her a theater in Paris, the Duncans were the priests of a cult (Art was whatever Isadora did),
     when the car that was bringing her two children home from the other side of Paris stalled on a bridge across the Seine. Forgetting that he'd left the car in gear, the chauffeur got out to crank the motor. The car started, knocked down the chauffeur, plunged off the bridge into the Seine.
     The children and their nurse were drowned.

     The rest of her life moved desperately on
     in the clatter of scandalized tongues, among the kidding faces of reporters, the threatening of bailiffs, the expostulations of hotelmanagers bringing overdue bills.
     Isadora drank too much, she couldn't keep her hands off goodlooking young men, she dyed her hair various shades of brightred, she never took the trouble to make up her face properly, was careless about her dress, couldn't bother to keep her figure in shape, never could keep track of her money
     but a great sense of health
     filled the hall
     when the pearshaped figure with the beautiful great arms tramped forward slowly from the back of the stage.
     She was afraid of nothing; she was a great dancer.

     In her own city of San Francisco the politicians wouldn't let her dance in the Greek Theater they'd built under her influence. Wherever she went she gave offense to the philistines. When the war broke out she danced the Marseillaise, but it didn't seem quite respectable and she gave offense by refusing to give up Wagner or to show the proper respectable feelings
     of satisfaction at the butchery.
     On her South American tour
     she picked up men everywhere,
     a Spanish painter, a couple of prizefighters, a stoker on the boat, a Brazilian poet,
     brawled in tangohalls, bawled out the Argentines for n****** from the footlights, lushly triumphed in Montevideo and Brazil; but if she had money she couldn't help scandalously spending it on tangodancers, handouts, afterthetheater suppers, the generous gesture, no, all on my bill. The managers gypped her. She was afraid of nothing, never ashamed in the public eye of the clatter of scandalized tongues, the headlines in the afternoon papers.

     When October split the husk off the old world, she remembered St. Petersburg, the coffins lurching through the silent streets the white faces, the clenched fists that night in St. Petersburg, and danced the March Slave.
     and waved red cheesecloth under the noses of the Boston old ladies in Symphony Hall;
     but when she went to Russia full of hope of a school and work and a new life in freedom, it was too enormous, it was too difficult; cold vodka, lice, no service in the hotels, new and old still piled pellmell together, seedbed and scrapheap, she hadn't the patience, her life had been too easy;
     she picked up a yellowhaired poet
     and brought him back
     to Europe and the grand hotels.
     Yessenin smashed up a whole floor of the Adlon in Berlin in one drunken party, he ruined a suite at the Continental in Paris. When he went back to Russia he killed himself. It was too enormous, it was too difficult.

     When it was impossible to raise any more money for Art, for the crowds eating and drinking in the hotel suites and the rent of Rolls-Royces and the board of her pupils and disciples,
     Isadora went to the Riviera to write her memoirs to scrape up some cash out of the American public that had awakened after the war to the crassness of materialism and the Greeks and scandal and Art, and still had dollars to spend.
     She hired a studio in Nice, but she could never pay the rent. She'd quarreled with her millionaire. Her jewels, the famous emerald, the ermine cloak, the works of art presented by the artists, had all gone into pawnshops or been seized by hotelkeepers. All she had was the old blue drapes that had seen her great triumphs, a redleather handbag, and an old furcoat that was split down the back.
     She couldn't stop drinking or putting her arms around the neck of the nearest young man; if she got any cash she threw a party or gave it away.
     She tried to drown herself, but an English naval officer pulled her out of the moonlit Mediterranean.

     One day at a little restaurant at Golfe Juan she picked up a good-looking young w** who kept a garage and drove a little Bugatti racer.
     Saying that she might want to buy the car, she made him go to her studio to take her out for a ride;
     her friends didn't want her to go, said he was nothing but a mechanic; she insisted, she'd had a few drinks (there was nothing left she cared for in the world but a few drinks and a goodlooking young man);
     she got beside him and
     she threw her heavilyfringed scarf round her neck with a big sweep she had and
     turned back and said
     with the strong California accent her French never lost;
     Adieu, mes amis, je vais à la gloire.
     The mechanic put his car in gear and started.
     The heavy trailing scarf caught in a wheel, wound tight. Her head was wrenched against the side of the car. The car stopped instantly; her neck was broken, her nose crunched, Isadora was dead.


I don't have much more to say about that, I really just like the writing. Actually, I guess there is a bit more to it than that. I like this passage, and the other biographies he wrote, because they feel like a sort of canonization of the people whose lives he writes about in a new American mythology; and, I like his mythology -- the people he includes and the aspects of their lives that he cares about -- far more than I like the American lore that I and probably you were raised on. Though he turned very conservative late in life, Dos Passos was a socialist when he wrote this. Regardless, you probably noticed that I censored out two racial slurs from the passage above, and, more significantly, his cast of lead characters and his selection of historical biographies, chosen it would seem to capture a broad strata of American life, does not include any black people.
    I guess I will also add this fun anecdote about Isadora Duncan from Wikipedia: "In a reminiscent sketch, Zelda Fitzgerald wrote how she and F. Scott Fitzgerald, her husband, sat in a Paris cafe watching a somewhat drunk Duncan. He would speak of how memorable it was, but what Zelda recalled was that while all eyes were watching Duncan, Zelda was able to steal the salt and pepper shakers from the table."
     Continuing with the Roaring 20's theme, the next passages I have are from the book, The First Ten Years of American Communism: Report of a participant, by James P. Cannon (those ten years being 1918-1928). It's a book which I never finished, and which I only read at all for a high school paper nearly a decade ago. But the passage I want to share was one that stuck with me enough that I remembered a decade later to look for it, and recognized it as soon as I found it. What follows is section VII of the introduction to the book:


VII

These two combined national and international factors likewise operated interactively on the American Communist Party in the later transition period of its gradual degradation which began in the middle of the Twenties and was virtually completed by the end of the decade. At that conjuncture the deadening conservatism of American life, induced by the unprecedented boom of post-war American capitalism, coinciding with the reactionary swing in Russia, caught the infant movement of American communism from two sides, as in a vise from which it could not escape.
     In this period the reactionary Russian influence, transmitted through the Comintern, wrought unmitigated evil in the American party. There is plenty of evidence of that. But here again it is false to ascribe all responsibility to the Russians, as an outside and uncontrolled force, for they, in turn, were powerfully influenced by the evolution of American capitalism. The American boom of that period, carrying European capitalism with it to a new stabilization after the post-war crisis and revolutionary upsurge, was the prime influence generating the mood of retreat to national reformism, and therewith the rise of Stalinism in Russia.
     At the same time, the astounding vitality of expanding American capitalism seemed to close off all perspectives for a revolutionary movement in this country. As the wave of labor radicalism was pushed back by the ascending prosperity, the party began to run into difficulty on all fronts.
     All the get-rich-quick schemes of Pepperite adventurism, all the "high politics" of bluff and make-believe, had blown up in disaster. Even the previous achievements of solid work began to crumble away. The trade-union successes, which piled up so impressively in the preceding period, were turned into a series of defeats which became a virtual rout, while the Gompers "red hunt" rode triumphantly from one end of the labor movement to the other. The poor showing of the party in the presidential election of 1924 testified most convincingly to the party's isolation.
     All the bright prospects which had fired the ambition of the party leaders to build a mass part of American communism in a short time, by a series of forced marches, had gone glimmering by the time the party picked up the pieces after the election campaign of 1924. And the worst was yet to come.
     It was a time for the party to re-examine its prospects in the light of basic doctrine and to settle down for a siege; to recognize the new, unfavorable situation in the country, but not to mistake it for permanence. The party needed then a serious theoretical schooling, and a historical perspective upon which to base a confident and patient work of preparation for the future. But that was precisely what was lacking.
     The great crisis of the Thirties, with its limitless possibilities for the revolutionary party, was just around the corner, but the party leaders could not see it. They spoke about it, from old habit, but they began to doubt it. The degeneration of the party as a revolutionary organization definitely began already then, and partly for this reason. When the crisis finally arrived -- pretty much on schedule according to the Marxist prognosis -- the party was no longer the same party.


It is that last sentence which stuck with me, though I am struggling to remember precisely what it meant to me at a time when my politics were relatively amorphous. I don't think my take on it was any more profound than a lesson on the importance of persistence, or something of the like. Cannon restates and expands on the ideas of this passage in the final section of the introduction, which I think is also worth sharing and have transcribed below:


XIV

Long experience has shown that economic conditions, which produce revolutionary movements in the first place and largely regulate the tempo of their growth, can also, in changed circumstances, halt their progress and push them back. Individuals on both sides of the class struggle can only do so much, for they are required to operate within this general framework. It would be well to keep this in mind if one is to make head or tail of the ups and downs of early American communism and see something in the process besides personal deliquencies, quarrels and accidents.
     The current witch hunt in the United States is apparently motivated by the theory that a revolutionary movement is created by the will of conspirators, and conversely, that it can be eliminated by police measures. This assumption finds little support in the history of the first ten years of the Communist Party in this country.
     The American radical movement, in all its branches, was thoroughly persecuted during the war and post-war period (1917-1920). Vigilante raids on radical meetings were the order of the day. Practically all the prominent leaders were indicted. Thousands were arrested. Whole shiploads of foreign-born radicals were deported. Hundreds were imprisoned.
     It took tough people to stand up against all that, but the pioneer communists were pretty tough, as the record shows. The persecution cut down the numerical strength of the movement, but did not break its basic cadres. The party emerged from the underground at the end of 1921 with a strong morale and with a leadership tested in the process of natural selection.
     The quick recovery of the American economy after the crisis of 1921, and the beginning of the long boom, was accompanied by a relaxation of the political tension and a virtual suspension of police action against the radicals. That did not help the revolutionary party, far from it. That's when it began to run into real trouble.
     The prosperity, which appeared to push revolutionary perspectives far into the future, dealt heavier blows to the party than the earlier persecution. The persecution cut down its numerical strength, but its cadres remained intact and self-confident. The prosperity sapped the confidence of the cadres in the revolutionary future. Persecution inflicted wounds on the body of the party, but the drawn-out prosperity of the Twenties killed its  soul.
     Across the sea the same basic objective factor -- he new stabilization of European capitalism sparked by the American boom -- had similarly affected the ruling majority of the Russian party, and through them, the Comintern; and the conservative Comintern brought a heavy retrogressive influence to bear on the American party which had already begun to acquire the senile disease of conservatism before its youth was spent.
     This is the true setting within which the history of the party in the last half of the Twenties must be studied. There is an instructive lesson here for our present times too. From the whole experience we can conclude that the present slump in American radicalism is due more to the long prosperity than to the witch hunt, and that a new economic crisis will set the stage for a revival of the movement, with or without the witch hunt.
     We can also expect that the new revival will find more worthy leaders, who have learned from the mistakes of their ancestors to stand up against an unfavorable conjecture and keep the historical perspective clear. This perspective reads: The stability of American capitalism is only the transient appearance of things; the revolution of the American workers is the true reality.


I am resisting the impulse to expound on this with my own shallow historical analysis, since I am not a historian. Ultimately, I think it's just nice to read a report from a person who wanted the same thing I want about why they failed, and nice to have a contemporary communist perspective on the prosperity of the 20's. It's nice to look back on these words, published in 1962, and note that a decline in the prosperity of American capitalism does seem to be giving rise to renewed radicalism. It is not a profound lesson, but I hope that we can persist in that radicalism through any temporary assertions of American strength.
    Finally, because the book was sitting near me as I began to type this up, I decided at the last minute to add Thucydides's description of what came to be known as the Plague of Athens. It would have been more fitting with the theme if I had a passage on the Spanish flu, but I do not, and I like this piece of writing. Thucydides writes as a direct observer of the plague, which occurred in 430 B.C., and he claims to have survived it himself. For me, it is thrilling to read such an ancient and yet incredibly detailed and eloquent description of the symptoms and social effects of the plague  -- it is hard for me to imagine that there exists any more substantial writing about an epidemic which has survived from as long ago as this. The plague took place early on in the Peloponnesian War, which Thucydides describes as the largest-scale war that region had yet experienced. I warn you that what follows is pretty gruesome and desperate:


THE PLAGUE

In this way the public funeral was conducted in the winter that came at the end of the first year of the war. At the beginning of the following summer the Peloponnesians and their allies, with two-thirds of their total forces as before, invaded Attica, again under the command of the Spartan King Archidamus, the son of Zeuxidamus. Taking up their positions, they set about devastation of the country.
     They had not been many days in Attica before the plague first broke out among the Athenians. Previously attacks of the plague had been reported from many other places in the neighborhood of Lemnos and elsewhere, but there was no record of the disease being so virulent anywhere else or causing so many deaths as it did in Athens. At the beginning the doctors were quite incapable of treating the disease because of their ignorance of the right methods. In fact mortality among the doctors was the highest of all, since they came more frequently in contact with the sick. Nor was any other human art or science of any help at all. Equally useless were prayers made in the temples, consultation of oracles, and so forth; indeed, in the end people were so overcome by their sufferings that they paid no further attention to such things.
     The plague originated, so they say, in Ethiopia in upper Egypt, and spread from there into Egypt itself and Libya and much of the territory of the King of Persia. In the city of Athens it appeared suddenly, and the first cases were among the population of Piraeus,where there were no wells at the time, so that it was supposed by them that the Peloponnesians had poisoned the reservoirs. Later, however, it appeared also in the upper city, and by this time the deaths were greatly increasing in number. As to the question of how it could first have come about or what causes can be found adequate to explain its powerful effect on nature, I must leave that to be considered by other writers, with or without medical experience. I myself shall merely describe what it was like, and set down the symptoms, knowledge of which will enable it to be recognized, if it should ever break out again. I had the disease myself and saw others suffering from it.
     That year, as is generally admitted, was particularly free from all other kinds of illness, though those who did have any illness previously all caught the plague in the end. In other cases, however, there seemed to be no reason for the attacks. People in perfect health suddenly began to have burning feelings in the head; their eyes became red and inflamed; inside their mouths there was bleeding from the throat and tongue, and the breath became unnatural and unpleasant. The next symptoms were sneezing and hoarseness of voice, and before long the pain settled on the chest and was accompanied by coughing. Next the stomach as affected with stomach-aches and with vomitings of every kind of bile that has been given a name by the medical profession, all this being accompanied by great pain and difficulty. In most cases there were attacks of ineffectual retching, producing violent spasms; this sometimes ended with this stage of the disease, but sometimes continued long afterwards. Externally the body was not very hot to the touch, nor as there any pallor the skin was rather reddish and livid, breaking out into small pustules and ulcers. But inside there was a feeling of burning, so that people could not bear the touch even of the lightest linen clothing, but wanted to be completely naked, and indeed most of all would have liked to plunge into cold water. Many of the sick who were uncared for actually did so, plunging into the water-tanks in an effort to relieve a thirst which was unquenchable; for it was just the same with them whether they drank much or little. Then all the time they were afflicted with insomnia and the desperate feeling of not being able to keep still.
     In the period when the disease was at its height, the body, so far from wasting away, showed surprising powers of resistance to all the agony, so that there was still some strength left on the seventh or eighth day, which was the time when, in most cases, death came from the internal fever. But if people survived this critical period, then the disease descended to the bowels, producing violent ulceration and uncontrollable diarrhoea, so that most of them died later as a result of the weakness caused by this. For the disease, first settling in the head, went on to affect every part of the body in turn, and even when people escaped its worst effects, it still left its traces on them by fastening upon the extremities of the body. It affected the genitals, the fingers, and the toes, and many of those who recovered lost the use of these members some, too, went blind. There were some also who, when they began to get better, suffered from a total loss of memory, not knowing who they were themselves and being unable to recognize their friends.
     Words indeed fail one when one tries to give a general picture of this disease; and as for the sufferings of individuals, they seemed almost beyond the capacity of human nature to endure. Here in particular is a point where this plague showed itself to be something quite different from ordinary diseases: though there were many dead bodies lying about unburied, the birds and animals that eat human flesh either did not come near them or if they did taste the flesh, died of it afterwards. Evidence for this may be found in the fact that there was a complete disappearance of all birds of prey: they were not to be seen either round the bodies or anywhere else. But dogs, being domestic animals, provided the best opportunity of observing this effect of the plague.
     These, then, were the general features of the disease, though I have omitted all kinds of peculiarities which occurred in various individual cases. Meanwhile, during all this time there was no serious outbreak of any of the usual kinds of illness; if any such cases did occur, they ended in the plague. Some died in neglect, some in spite of every possible care being taken of them. As for a recognized method of treatment, it would be true to say that no such thing existed: what did good in some cases did harm in others. Those with naturally strong constitutions were no better able than the weak to resist the disease, which carried away all alike, even those who were treated and dieted with the greatest care. The most terrible thing of all was the despair into which people fell when they realized that they had caught the plague; for they would immediately adopt an attitude of utter hopelessness, and, by giving in in this way, would lose their powers of resistance. Terrible, too, was the sight of people dying like sheep through having caught the disease as a result of nursing others. This indeed caused more deaths than anything else. For when people were afraid to visit the sick, then they died with no one to look after them; indeed, there were many houses in which all the inhabitants perished through lack of any attention. When, on the other hand, they did visit the sick, they lost their own lives, and this was particularly true of those who made it a point of honour to act properly. Such people felt ashamed to think of their own safety and went into their friends' houses at times when even the members of the household were so overwhelmed by the weight of their calamities that they had actually given up the usual practice of making laments for the dead. Yet still the ones who felt most pity for the sick and dying were those who had had the plague themselves and had recovered from it. They knew what it was like and at the same time felt themselves to be safe, for no one caught the disease twice, or, if he did, the second attack was never fatal. Such people were congratulated on all sides, and they themselves were so elated at the time of their recovery that thy fondly imagined that they could never die of any other disease in the future.
     A factor which made matters much worse than they were already was the removal of people from the country into the city, and this particularly affected the incomers. There were no houses for them, and, living as thy did during the hot season in badly ventilated huts, they died like flies. The bodies of the dying were heaped one on top of the other, and half-dead creatures could be seen staggering about in the streets or flocking around the fountains in their desire for water. The temples in which they took up their quarters were full of the dead bodies of people who had died inside them. For the catastrophe was so overwhelming that men, not knowing what would happen next to them, became indifferent to every rule of religion or of law. All the funeral ceremonies which used to be observed were now disorganized, and they buried the dead as best they could. Many people, lacking the necessary means of burial because so many deaths had already occurred in their households, adopted the most shameless methods. They would arrive first at a funeral pyre that had been made by others, put their own dead upon it and set it alight; or, finding another pyre burning, they would throw the corpse they were carrying on top of the other one and go away.
     In other respects also Athens owed to the plague the beginnings of a state of unprecedented lawlessness. Seeing how quick and abrupt were the changes of fortune which came to the rich who suddenly died and to those who had previously been penniless but now inherited their wealth, people now began openly to venture on acts of self-indulgence which before then they used to keep dark. Thus they resolved to spend their money quickly and to spend it on pleasure, since money and life alike seemed equally ephemeral. As for what is called honour, no one showed himself willing to abide by its laws, so doubtful was it whether one would live to enjoy the name for it. It was generally agreed that what was both honourable and valuable was the pleasure of the moment and everything that might conceivably contribute to that pleasure. No fear of god or law of man had a restraining influence. As or the gods, it seemed to be the same thing whether one worshipped them or not, when one saw the good and the bad dying indiscriminately. As for offences against human law, no one expected to live long enough to be brought to trial and punished: instead everyone felt that already a far heavier sentence had been passed on him and was hanging over him, and that before the time for its execution arrived it was only natural to get some pleasure out of life.
     This, then, was the calamity which fell upon Athens, and the times were hard indeed, with men dying inside the city and the land outside being laid to waste. At this time of distress people naturally recalled old oracles, and among them was a verse which the old men claimed had been delivered in the past and which said:

War with the Dorians comes, and a death will come at the same time.

There had been a controversy as to whether the word in this ancient verse was 'dearth' rather than 'death'; but in the present state of affairs the view that the word was 'death' naturally prevailed; it was a case of people adapting their memories to suit their sufferings. Certainly I think that if there is ever another war with the Dorians after this one, and if a dearth results from it, then in all probability people will quote the other version.
     Then also the oracle that was given to the Spartans was remembered by those who knew of it that when they inquired whether they should go to war, they received the reply that, if they fought with all their might, victory would be theirs and that the god himself would be on their side. What was actually happening seemed to fit well with the words of this oracle; certainly the plague broke out directly after the Peloponnesian invasion, and never affected the Peoloponnese at all, or not seriously its full force was felt at Athens, and, after Athens, in the most densely populated of the other towns.
     Such were the events connected with the plague. Meanwhile the Peloponnesians, after laying waste the Attic plain, moved on into the Paralian district as far as Laurium, where the Athenian silver-mines are. First they laid waste to the side that looks towards the Peloponnese, and then the other side facing Euboea and Andros.
